[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters."
And today, I have a very
special guest with me.
We have been friends
for a number of years
since we met at the
first time sharing
a stage at an event in Mexico.
Philip is a
motivational speaker.
He is an author.
He is a filmmaker.
And he helps you to excavate
the light in your life
and take that to
the world and make
sense of some of
the dark spaces that
may reside in your energetic
body, in your story.
And he does this through
many different concepts,
one of which is
called One Last Talk.
It is a book, but
it is a concept
where he helps you understand
your personal story so that you
can project out where you
might go and understand more
about how you can
achieve a deeper
sense of peace, happiness,
and fulfillment in your life.
Philip.
How did I go?
Was that a good intro?
>> Excellent.
[LAUGH]
That was great.
Thank you.
>> I think you're in a unique
line of work in that you are
experimenting with the work
yourself and using people
to experiment on
their own lives,
and using life as an opportunity
to discover more of the gifts
that people have.
And I see that in
your work, you're
constantly seeking to evolve.
But one of the first areas
that I want to speak about
is a little bit about the
cultural sort of environment
that we've found
ourselves in the midst
of in this particular time.
We have developed what
we sort of call in some
circles an acronym,
a weird culture,
a Western-educated,
industrialized, rich and
democratic world.
I think I got the spacing right.
And that has created
an environment
where we've seemed to place
material possessions and wealth
accumulation above
family, above friends,
and we've isolated ourselves
in our wealthy houses up
on the hill.
You've worked with many of
these people at great cost.
What do you think
some of the biggest
downfalls of this system are
in terms of people's happiness,
health, and well-being?
>> I think a lot of the
social constructs that have
historically been around--
I mean, even if I
think about Ireland,
a small island
where I grew up, we
put bank managers on pedestals.
We put financial
institutions on pedestals.
We were fearful of them.
We gave them way
too much respect.
If you go back to
the early '70s,
if you walk down the
pathway or the sidewalk
and a priest came towards you,
you would step off the pavement
and allow the priest to pass.
And as the banking
system has been shaken
and as people have taken
the bank managers literally
off pedestals, as Catholicism
in Ireland has been shaken
and people are choosing, for
example, not to go to church,
it's leaving some
sort of vacuum.
And it's leaving people
isolated to some extent
and searching for
community on Facebook.
And yes, Facebook groups
and Facebook communities,
some of them are very good.
But sometimes they're no
more than a Facebook group.
And people are moving
into these places
online, looking for
a village of people,
looking for a community,
and not necessarily feeling
the spiritual connective
tissues that they want
or connectivity that they want.
And then they're left
looking in the mirror going,
the community's not the problem.
I'm the problem.
I'm the issue here.
And I feel that we're in
a world right now where
the greatest pandemic is
isolation and loneliness.
And you can have 5,000 Facebook
friends, 25,000 Twitter
followers, and yet feel very
lonely within your own skin.
And I feel that that is one
of the biggest things that
is haunting humanity.
And what a lot of
people are doing is
they're trying to replace
that with achievement,
and it simply is not working.
>> An interesting point you
raise is about social media.
I mean, we have given away a lot
of our self-worth and our value
to social media.
And people will look
to likes and views
as a sense of self-worth.
And that is leading the world
in quite a tricky predicament
in that the younger generation,
or even this current generation
that's alive now
are externalizing
their self-worth as opposed to
building that from the inside.
Is that something you'd say
you've witnessed in your work?
>> I see it all the time.
I see it all the time.
We're looking for that
external recognition.
And I'm working with
clients every single day
that have climbed that
mountain, the mountain
of societal success,
financial success.
And they've climbed
the mountain.
They get to the top.
They look around, and they just
feel-- they feel an emptiness.
And as you and I have discussed
before, rather than stopping
and saying, what are I
missing, what am I not seeing,
what is the question
I'm avoiding,
what is the part of me that
I'm afraid the world will
see, we just come
down off the mountain,
climb another mountain,
and keep repeating
the same internal pattern
and getting exactly
the same result. All
the time I see it.
I see it every single day.
>> Would you say that the
way that we've been taught
to parent in the West could
be contributing to that?
I mean, I've spoken
to people who
have built a business, made huge
amounts of monetary success,
pleased their parents to
no end, and then realized
they were only doing
it because that's
how they were loved as a child.
They were loved when
they were successful.
they got good grades.
And they translated
that to, well, I'll
be loved when I'm wealthy.
And then when they realize
they've been doing that,
it just brings their
whole world down.
And they're like, whoa.
Who am I to be now?
Is that the sort of thing
you're talking about?
>> Yeah.
I mean, I think it's spoken
expectations from our parents,
but I think where I
tend to focus a lot on
is the unspoken expectations.
So for example, the little
analogy or story that I use
is, you know, the father comes
down to the kitchen table,
and Johnny's about
to go to school
and choose whatever college
he's about to go after.
And his father has
verbalized how much
he disdains parents that put
their kids under pressure.
And he turns to Johnny.
He says, Johnny,
you can do whatever
you want with your
life, and Mom and myself
will be so proud of you.
Now I was a postman and your
grandfather was a postman,
but you go do whatever
you want to do.
And he goes to the golf course
and he tells his buddies
that he just had a chat.
But Johnny goes to
school that day,
wishing and praying and
dreaming about being a pilot.
But actually, he yearns
the love of his father
and the approval of his father,
and he's haunted by the fact
that his father has
gifted him this idea
that really if you want me
to love you and accept you
beyond measure, you
should be a postman.
But he didn't say that.
It's the unspoken expectations.
And when you delve into
that, when you are parented,
it can show you a lot of
what drives you today,
and it can really help you
understand your narrative.
And it's not right or wrong.
It just is what it is.
But it allows you then to pivot
a little bit sooner in life
rather than waiting till you're
90 years old to discover it.
>> This sort of plays into that
idea that we are meaning making
machines, right?
We tend to place and create
meaning out of experiences.
So this is an example
of someone who created
meaning out of experience.
My dad said do
this, but deep down,
what I understood
to be true is that I
should be a postman if I want
to follow my dad's role in life.
As parents or as
children, how can we
be more aware of
those sort of meanings
we're placing on situations?
>> Yeah.
I mean, it's something
I struggle with.
I mean, I struggle
with a lot of things.
But the thing I struggle
with most is parenting.
It's just a constant.
And just when you think you're
just achieving something
very effectively, it just
comes back to bite you.
The only thing that I
have found to work truly
as a parent is honestly
allowing my kids to see
my vulnerabilities,
is to truthfully share
where my fears lie
when I come back
after a keynote or workshop
that didn't go well
is to sit down and talk my
kids, if they're interested.
And recently, we had
an example of this
where my little girl with a
few the neighbors-- they're all
eight years old--
decided that they'd
fill the mailboxes with rocks.
And they did two or three, and
then my little girl felt guilty
and she came home.
And she said to her brother,
Charlie, who's my son who's 10,
she said, listen.
I did this, and I
feel really bad.
And just about two weeks
earlier, I basically
had this conversation
with my kids
where I shared
stuff that I'd done
that I'm not very proud of.
And my wife was like, oh my god.
I can't believe
you're sharing this.
And the kids were mesmerized.
They just couldn't believe that
Dad was sharing all this stuff
that he'd done that
he's not proud of
and that was bad or bold.
And Charlie turns to Maggie
in the moment of guilt
that she was feeling about
filling the mailboxes of rocks,
which is not a very serious
thing when you think about it,
and says, you should tell Dad.
She goes, Dad?
He's the one guy I'm
not going to tell.
And Charlie goes back and
says, you should tell Dad.
Remember a couple of weeks
ago, the stuff he told us?
He's done way worse.
And the two kids came
to me and they sat down
and they explained
what had happened,
and we just had a chat about it.
And I find that a lot
of parents is we're
trying to protect our kids.
And if you think about
it in a physical sense,
we put cotton wool
around all the corners
of all the chairs
and everything else,
and we're trying to overprotect
our kids by not allowing
our kids to see our weaknesses.
We play sports that we're
good at with our children
rather than playing a sport
that we can't play for crap,
and allowing our kids to see
that Dad is miserable at soccer
or miserable at tennis.
And I feel that we're actually
not protecting our kids at all.
We're just simply trying
to protect ourselves.
We're trying to protect
ourselves emotionally.
We justify it through
the lens of, well,
I'm doing the best
for my children.
And then our kids are
brought up in an environment
where they think their
parents are flawless.
They're superheroes.
And they go on to emulate
those parents, which
of course is a catastrophe,
because it's never
going to work.
>> One of the concepts I heard
you speak about in an interview
that I looked at or
listened to, should I say,
was this idea of somebody
who was in a midlife crisis.
They're working a job for
the last 15 or 20 years
that they hated.
And they hadn't built up
the strength or courage
to leave or do something that
really followed their passion.
And the excuse that he was
using in this particular example
that he gave was that he was
just doing it for his kids,
to make sure that they
could have enough money,
to make sure they
could be secure.
But ultimately, when I heard
you telling this story,
I could see that the example
he was setting for his children
was that, play it safe.
Do something you don't love.
Play within the rulebook.
And ultimately, he was causing
two catastrophes, right?
How is it that we do
this to our children,
and do you have any
examples of this?
>> Yeah.
I mean, if I remember that
correctly, it wasn't until I
said, you know, give me the
name of one of your children--
and let's just say
his child was John.
And I said, if John was
sitting where you are,
describing how painful
it is to go to a job
every single day for, I
believe, 14 years in a row where
your soul has been diluted
every single moment
of every single day and he was
saying exactly what you were
saying, and you
were standing here,
what would you say to him?
And he said, leave.
Don't waste another day
of your life, buddy.
You've got so much
more potential.
And it wasn't until I used--
maybe it's not the right
terminology-- his child for him
to understand what he
was inadvertently doing.
And he just-- he
couldn't see it.
He just couldn't see it.
He was using his children
as a reason or a rationale
to stay doing something
that he was doing.
But in the end of the
day-- and I can tell you
this for absolute certainty--
amongst other things,
the reason he stays is
not for his children.
The reason he stays
is not to put his kids
to a private school.
And the reason he stays is
not to pay the mortgage.
The reason he
stays is he doesn't
value himself enough to believe
that he deserves anything
more than a job that is killing
his soul every single day.
And he deprives his children and
humanity of his greatest gifts
by staying in a job
that just crushes
his soul every single day.
And what ends up happening is
that is not a conversation that
can exist in the future.
That becomes a lecture.
Because when dad says to his
young son, don't do that,
don't stay in a job, and
he's done it his entire life,
his son is either internally
or externally going, yeah, Dad.
OK, Dad.
Are we finished?
Can I get back to
whatever I'm doing?
But if he's an example of
that, a shining example where
he takes the risk, puts a value
on his own skin, and says,
I am worth more than this,
that conversation won't even
need to happen.
And if it does, his son will
be there, listening intently,
because his father's an
example of everything
that he's discussing.
>> One of the main parts of your
work now is around this concept
called One Last Talk.
And I know there's going
to be some stories we're
going to hear around
this, but before we
go into any personal
stories that you've shared
or on some topics that
I might ask you about,
what is the concept behind this,
and how did you sort of come up
with this line of work?
Because it's quite unique.
Nobody else is doing this.
And how did you
come up with this?
[SIGH]
>> I wanted to change
the conversation.
I wanted to challenge
the event space
where the majority
of live events
are the audience are
sitting in the seats, one
guru or specialist or
expert after another gets up
there and shares
their success story,
and maybe some
beautiful value as well.
How I made it, how I did this.
And often, there's
this undertone
where people don't discuss it.
As people are leaving, not
feeling motivated or inspired,
they're feeling a
little bit inadequate.
And I use Richard Branson,
and I say that respectfully,
because Richard's done some
wonderful things in the world.
But the relatability
was the next thing
I wanted to challenge.
How many people can
sit in an audience,
relate to Richard,
when at his peak
he had 85,000 staff or a team.
He had his airline,
and so on and so forth.
And internally-- and I've
interviewed enough people
to know this for fact-- is they
go, yeah, but I can't do that.
He's Richard Branson.
I can't do that.
And I wanted to
create a platform
where the people on the
stage are the audience,
and that there is no gurus.
There is no VIP tickets.
And I wanted to prove to
humanity not just does everyone
have a beautiful,
personal story,
but that that story matters.
And when they're
courageous enough
to share a part of
them that perhaps they
don't want the world to know--
they share a part of
that they're ashamed of,
they share a part of themselves
that they're embarrassed by--
they free themselves
of that story.
They heal themselves
of that trauma.
And in turn, inadvertently, they
invite the rest of the world
to be healed also,
because somebody
on the other side of the globe
listens to a One Last Talk,
watches a One Last
Talk, and goes, oh my.
I'm not alone.
And if he can talk
about his story,
if she can share her story,
maybe I can share mine.
And what happens is when healing
happens, connection grows.
And when connection is there,
it prevents the possibility
of isolation and loneliness.
And that's why One
Last Talk exists.
>> Wow.
Marshall Rosenberg--
I'm not sure
if you're familiar with
his work-- he wrote
a really seminal piece
of work on communication
called Nonviolent Communication.
And one of the
concepts he talks about
is understanding somebody's
need or understanding somebody's
pain and empathizing with it.
Not solving it, not fixing
it, not creating a solution
or saying, I know a
therapist or I know this.
Just hearing it,
just understanding it
is healing, and can be
the healing process.
Is that something
that you subscribe to?
Is that something you've seen?
>> I remember this so clearly.
We ran a One Last
Talk in Boulder.
And this man called
in a month beforehand.
He's a client of mine.
And he said, my son Matthew
is having some challenges.
I'd love him to come
to One Last Talk.
How do I get him there?
I said, tell me.
What are you thinking
of saying or doing?
He said, well, I'm going to
sit him down and give him all
the reasons why he should go.
And I said, how does that work?
And he goes, what do you mean?
I said, well, how did
that work for you,
when your father did that?
He goes, it didn't.
I said, what if you just sat
down and said, I love you,
I'm scared of losing you, I
don't know what's going on.
Let me understand you
so I can support you
or get the hell out
of your own way,
or the hell out of your way.
And his son said, I'll
think about it when he said,
would you come to One Last Talk?
And a month later, they
arrived in Boulder,
and his son was 15 years old.
And at the end of
the event-- he's
not a hugging kid,
according to his father,
which is interesting.
At the end of the event,
his father comes up,
and this young Matthew appears
behind him and comes straight
up and just launches himself
into my chest and embraces me.
And I hold him.
I look behind, and his
father starts to cry.
And as we pull apart
from our embrace,
a question I rarely
ask anybody, I
said, what's your number
one takeaway from today
after watching six
speakers, one after another,
share their one last talk?
He said, it's great to know
that adults have problems too.
It's great to know that
adults have problems too.
Because I think a lot of
parents make their job,
their mortgage payment,
their investment portfolio
so massive, so significant--
talk about meaning--
that a child who's struggling
to connect in the playground
doesn't have the
space, the significance
to come to Dad or Mom
with the biggest challenge
that they are facing in
their lives right now,
and to feel that they
can air that and that it
has significance and
meaning, and that they're OK,
and they're valued
enough in that unit
to be able to do that.
And in that moment, the
father realized that he just
doesn't listen to his son.
He's too busy telling him
what he should and should not
be doing with his life, which
is exactly what his father did
to him.
And so it continues.
>> To bring yourself to
a level of awareness that
you're repeating the patterns
that your parents did
and that's become something that
you're subconsciously now doing
with your children, how do
people come to that awareness
point?
How have you seen them come
to that awareness point?
>> Well, I'll give you one,
and it's a bit of a fun thing,
but it's real, is
I often ask people,
which of your parents
are you most like?
And I often get reactions like,
well, I can tell you one thing.
I'm definitely not my dad.
There's no doubt.
I'm definitely not my father.
Good luck with that one.
That's most likely who you
are almost identical to.
And the more that you try
to move away from that,
the more you're
emulating your father.
It's about recognizing
that actually, you're
very similar to your father.
It's about integrating
and allowing yourself
to feel that you're almost
identical in so many ways,
and also unique in many ways.
It's about accepting that and
then choosing a different path.
So many parents today
are trying to make
sure that their kids don't get
what they got, or they have
what they didn't have.
And the polar opposite of
that, the other extreme
is that they just continue
to repeat history.
And a lot of parents go,
yeah, well, my dad did this,
and I probably have--
my kids don't get that.
My natural assumption,
James, all the time
is, I'm passing shit onto my
kids that doesn't serve them.
That's my natural assumption.
And if I can assume that, that
opens doorways and awareness
and opportunities for me to
see little subtleties of things
that I say, if I have to
stop this car-- and I go,
oh, my good god.
That was my dad.
9,000 times a day, it
felt like he said it.
And I go, I'm catching that.
But if I'm in denial of that
reality, if I say to myself,
no, I'm more aware of
that, my kids don't--
it's just to assume
every day that you're
passing on shit to your kids
that is not going to serve--
that didn't serve you.
That's what we do.
But don't try to create
this chasm between you
and the dysfunctionality
you saw in your parents.
Come closer to it
and see the fact
that it's already
there inside of you,
and then you can work with it.
Now you have something
to work with.
It's like clay.
You can maneuver it and
manipulate it and then
create something
beautiful out of it.
>> But that's painful
as shit, right?
Because that might be a
subtle thing, like, OK.
I'm telling my kids, be quiet.
Don't make me stop the car.
OK, that's a subtlety that's
important to be aware of,
and if you are aware
of that, you're
able to course correct
and say, hang on.
How can I give my children
the microphone for a minute
so they can feel
heard and understood?
So that's fixable.
What if you were abused?
What if you were
physically abused?
sexually abused?
Leaning into that
is not an exercise
that most people want to do.
In fact, they spend most of
their life trying to hide that.
>> Exactly.
The energy that's expelled
trying to hide that stuff
is astonishing.
And the way that I use to
describe that is they're
so used to hiding it.
The amount of energy it
takes to hide and suppress
any type of trauma
is staggering.
And we're living with
it every single day
that we don't even know.
And the best way I
describe this is my mother
suffers from significant
arthritis and pain every day.
And I often ask her,
how are you doing today?
And she'd go, great.
Today is a good day.
And if I could get a probe
that could go into my hip--
and could go into her hip
and I could experience
for two seconds, five seconds
what she's experiencing
in terms of pain,
I'd land on the floor
like a bag of potatoes, and I'd
roll around probably in agony.
But she's been living with
that pain for so long.
She's been living with
that pain for so long,
and she's been numbing
it for so long,
she has no idea of
the energetic cost.
And I believe that the cost,
the short-term discomfort,
if you want to call it that,
of addressing a trauma such
as sexual abuse, physical
abuse, mental abuse that you
experienced as a child,
the short-term discomfort--
it's the tip of the iceberg
when it comes to living
with that every single day.
Because again, your
soul is depressed.
Your spirit is squashed.
You don't get to amplify.
You don't get to show up.
You don't get to share
all of who you are.
And if you think for a moment
that by me hiding my trauma,
by me not talking about it
I'm protecting everybody else,
you're living in a cloud.
You're living on Mars, because
your kids are feeling it
energetically every single day.
They're not sitting
there going, why
is Mom not as alive as
my friend Albert's mom?
Where's the spark in her face?
My mother-- and I've
never shared this before--
but my mother was--
my mother was sexually abused
by a priest in Ireland.
And I always knew there
was something there.
I always knew there
She's so beautiful,
so intuitive.
But I always knew there was--
I always wondered, why
does she not trust herself?
Why is that intuition
that she has in
abundance that if I do have and
she gifted to me, why isn't she
trusted?
And I say this with
love and respect.
My mother doesn't like who
she is, and therefore allows
herself, her body
to deteriorate.
And she's never addressed
that in her life.
And that is her choice.
But as a child growing
up in that environment,
I knew there was something off.
I could feel it.
But it was never spoken about
until one day I turned to her.
I said, Mom, what do
I not know about you?
What are you not telling me?
By holding on to trauma,
you're passing it
on to the next generation
energetically, spiritually.
And I know you think you're
doing a good job suppressing
it, but you're not.
You're doing a shitty
job suppressing it,
because it's taking
way too much energy,
and that energy could be
expelled in so many other ways.
Because when you hide
your negative emotion,
you high trauma, you hide
your gift in there with it.
You put it in a box
and lock it away.
And I believe our greatest gift
lies right next to our deepest
wounds.
That's what I
believe to my core.
>> So people listening to this
right now may have experienced
trauma in their life.
Maybe they've being abused.
Maybe they've been
sexually abused.
verbally abused or told
that they're not good
enough or bullied,
and they've held onto that.
What can they do?
[SIGH]
>> They need to unpack it.
They need to verbalize it.
There's nothing in my opinion
more valuable, more healing--
not downloading your story,
but sharing your story.
Sharing it with
people you trust,
sharing it with strangers.
At the very least,
going to therapy.
I remember the first
time I went to therapy,
and I didn't need therapy.
I was way too cool for therapy.
I was going because
I was just curious.
And I went to see
this guy and I said,
I wanted to see how you work.
And I walked into the room.
And I'm not sure I've shared
this story with you, James.
But I walked into the room,
and there was two chairs.
And one had the
biggest box of Kleenex
I've ever seen in my life.
It looked like must have
been a wholesale box,
like a stack of them.
And I sat in the other chair.
And the guy walks in.
He goes, sorry.
That's my chair.
And I sat down.
It was like a "Jerry
Maguire" moment.
And I look at the Kleenex and
I'm thinking to myself, pfft.
Not a chance, buddy.
Crying?
Me?
I'd say two and a
half minutes in,
I was vibrating and oscillating
between complete sadness
that I've never experience in
my life before and absolute rage
and anger towards
myself and the world.
I was shocked.
I was stunned.
I was frightened.
And yet, I believed that
I didn't need the help.
I believed there wasn't
even a story to impact.
And if there was, it's
not that significant.
And over that period
of time I realized
the burden I was carrying,
the heaviness I was carrying.
And everything in my
life was representative
of what was going on.
I wasn't giving myself
permission to feel love
and to experience
love and to give love.
I wasn't giving myself
permission to even imagine
what it would be like to have
a good job that I enjoyed,
or start a business, or do
a speech, or write a book,
or anything.
Everything was
contracted and closed.
And week by week, month
by month, day by day,
whatever you want
to call it, I just
started letting go of more
and more and more stuff
and emerging on the
other side and feeling
lighter and more available.
And the possibilities
started to emerge
that I couldn't see before.
And I believe it's
directly related.
You need to unpack your story.
You need to understand the
cost of what you went through.
So many of us said,
yeah, OK, yeah.
My dad shouted at me.
Yeah, he hit me a few times.
And here's the classic.
Because that was the generation.
That's what they did.
My dad had that with his father.
My father did the best he could.
And the problem
there-- and maybe
he did-- but we need to isolate
the trauma from the person.
And if you can
understand the trauma
and how it affected you
away from the individual,
one is it allows you to
understand who you are
and how you are the way you
are today, and what drives you,
and what holds you back.
And secondly is it allows you
to heal the relationship that
has caused this to
begin with, and allows
you to create empathy
and understanding
in terms of what that person
was going through at that time.
>> To get to that place takes
time and takes awareness,
because I think this concept
of hurt people hurt people is
something that we don't
really acknowledge very much.
We say that, well, my father did
that because he was an asshole,
or that he was just a
mean person whereas,
how did he become like that?
What lineage did he have of his
experience and his childhood?
I think these are
interesting questions to ask.
Is that something that you often
find when people do that work?
They're like, oh, wow.
I realize why my
dad was like that.
>> Well, I think there's so much
anger and judgment present when
the trauma has not
been addressed.
So they're not ready
to even entertain
the idea of why their father did
what they did or their mother
did what they did.
But when they can start to heal
the trauma within themselves,
separate it from the
individual, and they
can start moving through
some of the stories,
they can start integrating the
rest of it and living with it
and seeing that
there is an upside--
I mean, that is a very, very,
very sensitive subject when
you say, when you
present the idea
that perhaps some goodness
came from the trauma
that you've experienced.
And people have to be
ready to hear that,
and ready to receive that.
And then they're open.
When they start to see there's
something good in this,
there's a learning in this,
there's an awareness in this,
then they're ready to go back to
the father they haven't spoken
in 10 years, the mother
they have ostracized out
of their life.
And even the ones
that have passed away,
and to create healing there.
And some of the greatest joy I
get is when I hear the stories.
My father or myself are talking
for the first time in 10 years.
And I got a man recently
to do something.
He's got a very estranged,
volatile relationship
with his father.
And he could sit in
front of me and tell me
stories that when he crashed his
father's motorbike many years
ago, his father came to the
scene, got the motorbike,
threw it in his truck,
absolutely ripped him apart.
-- left him on the side of the
street and tore off in his car.
And that was the anger speaking.
And when we moved
through the anger,
we moved through the trauma,
we moved through the hurt,
I asked him to tell
me that story again.
And he said, well, you know,
I wasn't hit by another car,
because that's
what I told my dad.
I was driving too fast
and my father knew it.
I said, what about having that
conversation with your dad?
And he wrote a letter.
And I asked him to
write the letter
and allow me to read
it with his permission,
to take out some of
the little snipes,
things like, well,
I did my best,
and because you
were never there.
You know that dig?
And I just asked him, go first.
Just go first.
And he said, do you
remember that bike?
I was driving too fast,
but you know that already,
and I'm sorry.
Do you remember this?
I lied to you.
I'm sorry.
Do you remember that?
That's not true, Dad.
I did all this because
I wanted your attention
and I wanted your love.
And the reason he
didn't write the letter
and he didn't want
to write the letter
is at the end of
it he just said,
I want a relationship with you.
If this is something you
want with me, let me know.
He was afraid of the answer
coming back being, no.
He got a phone call within an
hour of that letter arriving,
and they had the conversation,
the conversation that he never
imagined would
happen in his life.
Ever.
I have a father who--
we've been fortunate.
And it's not me.
Whatever is coming
through me, whatever I do,
I don't even know what it is.
And we get lots of
testimonials, and this and that.
But we got a letter
from a man one day.
Thank you for giving
me my son back.
Because the son came back
after this week in Ireland
and sat with his
father and went first.
And I do this
exercise, and I say
to people, name one
relationship in your life
that you want to deepen.
One relationship.
Despite the fact-- and
this is the key piece--
whether they have ever
demonstrated a desire
to deepen it, are capable of
deepening it, because people--
oh, you don't know my father.
You haven't met my mother.
They're human.
Trust me, I have a
fairly good handle on it.
Pick the person you
almost don't want to pick.
Then I ask them to
identify, what is the thing
that that person needs to do?
Not you.
What do they need to do in
order to facilitate a deepening
in your relationship?
And it could be something
like, well, my sister just
needs to be vulnerable.
Stop having all the goddamn
answers and always being right.
And then, of course,
I twist it and I go,
are you doing the thing that
you want from them back?
And if people are honest,
typically the answer is no.
Forgiveness is a wonderful
gift to give to somebody else,
but forgiveness is probably
one of the greatest
gifts you can give to yourself.
If you're holding a
grudge to somebody else,
you're paying the
price every single day.
Go first.
What have you got to lose?
Say sorry.
Say, I'm wrong.
Say, I'm scared.
Say, I don't know.
The three most beautiful
words that every parent
should have every single day
in front of their children.
I don't know, son.
Allow your kids to see
your humanity so they
begin to recognize their own.
>> You ran a talk, One Last
Talk recently in prison.
I think that's
amazing, first of all.
Can you tell me about how hard
it was to make that happen?
And then talk me through some of
the eventual outcomes of that,
because I found that
quite an impactful story.
[SIGH]
>> So it started with asking
a man who has been released,
who committed murder, to stand
on stage and share his one last
talk.
And that happened in Boulder.
And when you do a One Last
Talk, you don't go on the stage
and say, hi, my name
is, I'm glad to be here,
thanks for-- any of that stuff.
You just walk out and
you begin your story.
And he walked out,
and his opening line
was something along the lines
of, on September 5, 1999,
I shot and killed--
and he named the man.
And then he said, and I tried to
shoot and kill three other men.
That was his opening line.
You could feel the
energy shift in the room.
You could feel the judgment.
I could feel the eyes
in the back of my head.
And he walked through
his story and he says,
I'm not here to
justify what I did.
I'm not here to say,
here's my story.
This is why I did it.
That's up to you.
I have to live with my
consequences of something
that I did that I'm
deeply ashamed of.
But I've been asked here
today to share my story,
and that's what I'm going to do.
And he shared his story.
And at the end of
the talk, he said,
I wrote a letter that never went
to the mother of the victim.
They couldn't find her.
And he reached into
his back pocket,
and he opened up the letter,
and he read the letter
to the mother of the
man that he shot.
It was one of the most
extraordinary things I've ever
experienced in my life.
And what came next was
more extraordinary.
We had 120 people
or so in the room.
He got an overwhelming
standing ovation.
And one man took
the mic and said,
can I just apologize
for judging you?
And personally, the thing that
moved me the most is my then
nine-year-old boy--
and I never do one of
these, go and kiss granny
or go and give your man a hug
or go and tell him he's great.
When Quan got off the
stage, my nine-year-old son
walked up, put his
arms around him,
hugged him, held it, and
said, I loved your talk.
And Quan looked at me
and just broke down.
And that was the
gateway into prison.
That was the opportunity to
work with an organization
to get us into the prison,
and to bring an audience
and to put six men
on the stage to share
their one last talks, five of
which I believe had committed
murder, are serving time
for committing murder,
and one was a sex offender.
And what was so extraordinary
about the sex offender was
he was the last speaker.
I've almost died, very
close to death twice,
and yet I have never
seen another human
being more scared in my life.
I thought I understood
fear and scaredness
until I looked at this
man as he began his talk.
And I stood up and
I walked up to him
and I said, are you afraid?
And he goes, I'm beyond afraid.
It's the first time he's
ever spoken about his story
and who he was as a person.
And when you do that
in a prison system,
there's a very strong
likelihood that you
could be beaten up or killed.
But that's not what
he was afraid of.
He wasn't afraid
of being stabbed.
He wasn't afraid of getting
the shit kicked out of him.
He was so afraid of
sharing all of who he is.
He was afraid of
not being accepted.
He was afraid and
not being seen.
And he knows what that's like,
because that is his whole life.
He went on to describe
one part of a story
that he was raped himself
every single day for six months
by his own father.
And what was the most
astonishing piece
was the inmates stood
up, bawling, crying,
went up and hugged him.
Said, I've got your back.
I didn't realize.
I was judging you.
And three women
who we invited in--
my wife included-- had been
raped, one woman very viciously
over multiple periods of time.
And each of them went
up and embraced him.
But where the wheels come
off for me emotionally
was the last place
where the woman who'd
gone through the most sexual
abuse turned to her husband
and she said, I don't
want him to leave.
And he goes, what are
you talking about?
She says, I don't
want him to leave.
I don't want him to go
back into the population.
I want to protect him.
I want to keep him safe.
And the healing that
happened in that room
is beyond anything I have
ever imagined in my life.
I never imagined I would be
a tiny part of something that
could help create that
or bring that to you.
I never imagined I'd sit in
a room and experience that.
I've never experienced healing
in my life like that day.
And my own wife said to
me afterward, she says,
I finally get it.
What happened to
me wasn't about me,
and yet that's what I've been
holding for the last 20 years.
It was about all what
was going on for them.
And she was able to create
separation for the first time
ever.
And when I look at that, when
I think about One Last Talk,
it's bigger than me.
It's more important than me.
And it's something that
I don't feel I have--
I feel as if I have
a moral obligation
to bring that to the
world, because there
is nothing I have
experienced that it
creates healing and connection,
and therefore eradicates
loneliness.
>> This concept of separating
the person from the artifact,
or at least not judging
or blaming that person,
that seems to be the secret
to your ability to help people
break free from this fear and
pain that they're holding onto
in so many ways.
Is that the crux that you're
trying to lead people to?
Is that the opportunity
you see in this?
>> When it comes to
connecting with--
helping people connect,
because connection
is what it's all about for me.
You know, people think
it's about business.
It's about helping
people connect
to meaningful work,
meaningful relationships,
and a relationship
with themselves
that they're truly proud of.
And I remember one day
walking into a workshop,
and I don't know how
this lady did it.
There must have been 30
people at the workshop.
And by the time we
started, she must
have got around to everybody,
everybody in the room,
and shared her tragedy.
And her tragic story
was that her husband
cheated on her in
the most obnoxious,
horrendous, disgusting way.
And she managed to get to
every single person pretty much
in the room and
download this story
and receive the
type of attention
that she had been used to.
I walk in, and the
first question I
ask, intuitively, I just
said, so what brings you here?
Why are you here, really?
And she was-- and I said,
you're obviously eager to go.
And she goes, yeah.
My husband ripped my heart out.
My life has turned upside down.
I was blindsided.
This happened a year ago,
and no one saw it coming,
and my life is in turmoil.
And I said, you
didn't see it coming?
She goes, no.
I didn't see it coming.
You could feel the energy,
everyone in the room, go,
oh, god love her,
and everything else.
And I said, I don't
believe you for one second.
I'd never met her before.
She goes, excuse me?
I said, you are so smart.
You come across as
being so intuitive.
You're telling me you
did not see this coming?
You're telling me
you had no sense
that this possibility was
going to exist in your life?
I don't believe you.
And the anger emerged.
She was vibrating.
She wanted to rip my head off,
which is not uncommon sometimes
initially.
And I said, are you
angry right now?
She goes, no, no,
no, No, I'm not.
No, I'm not.
And she looked like she was
going to strangle somebody.
And I said, let's just name the
anger that's present, and let's
just drop just below that,
and let's see what emerges.
And her head drops, and she
shook and shook and shook.
And she lifted her face, and
the tears pouring down her face.
And she says, I knew
it the day I met him,
and I knew I shouldn't
marry him the day
I walked down the aisle.
People might say,
well, why would you
facilitate uncovering that?
I'll tell you why.
It's very simple.
So she never repeats
the same pattern again,
that she understands
her part in it.
Maybe he was an asshole.
Maybe he did something wrong.
But she knew it.
She picked the wrong
person because she
was so attached to
being in a relationship
that she chose to ignore the
red flags on the peripheral,
because she had her
eyes on the prize,
because she didn't
believe she could
be happy on her own
journey in this world,
that she needed somebody else
to validate and support her.
And now that she understands
that, she's aware of that,
she can forgive.
She can let go.
She can let go of
the charge, and even
get to the point to
forgive her ex and free
herself of the burden, and
allow love to come into her life
where perhaps there
was no space for it.
>> It seems a lot of your work
is based in vulnerability.
Is this a key element to
helping people unlock what
they're hiding?
>> Vulnerability to me
is just someone's truth.
It's just all of them.
And people work very,
very hard to present
the parts of themselves that
they want the world to see,
whether it's on Facebook or
whether it's in a room with me.
And I just--
I don't stop to think about it.
I just create a space to
allow people to show up
and to open up.
And you know, people
are running very fast,
people who are moving so
fast and so busy, just afraid
to stop and to
connect emotionally
with the very thing
they're avoiding.
I had a business owner
recently who has made it
multiple times over in
terms of financially.
And he just says, I
don't have any friends.
It's lonely.
And what he has done is he's
doubled down on the very place
that he feels that he's deriving
value, that he's presenting
value to the world, where
he gets significance,
and that's his work.
And that's why he has
become a workaholic.
And my job is to allow
him to get to the place
where he presents his truth,
and then we can build on that.
But unless that truth emerges,
if someone's hiding something
from themselves and therefore
me, I can't really help them.
And all I'm asking you to
do is to show up and show
me all of you, and I promise
you I will never judge you.
>> How can people really not
know they're hiding something,
though?
Because it's so insidious
the ways that we go out
into the world
and we work and we
prove our sense of self-worth.
And we're doing
this whole thing,
we're putting on
these masks every day.
These masks, these new
masks about who we should be
or what I'm going to do next.
And then how do we even know
who our real self is anymore?
How do we-- like, really.
How do we?
How do we understand
that part of us
that's eternal, that's always
us, that's always been us?
That's tricky work.
>> Well, I think the key to
that is letting go of the things
that we hold on to that
are part of our identity.
And that scares us.
It's like not being
a very strong swimmer
and then asking
someone to let go
of the bar at the
side of the pool.
And they feel very vulnerable,
and they feel out of control.
And control is this new,
emerging obsession with people.
If I'm in control,
then I'm safe.
And of course, that's
a complete illusion.
And I look back even at my own
life and I think to myself,
no one asked me, did I
want to be a Catholic?
I was told I was a Catholic.
No one asked me, do I
want to be Christian?
I was told I was a Christian.
No one asked me, do I
want to go to school?
I was told to go to school.
No one asked me, did I
want to learn algebra?
I was told you learn it.
That was useful.
Not.
We have to look at
our lives in a very--
one of the things
that's missing,
James, when it comes
to exploration of self,
what's completely missing
in so many people's lives
is curiosity.
I sat in front of
a couple one day.
I was asking them to describe
where they would love to live,
because they were on
polar different pages.
At least that's
what they thought.
But 99.9% of couples want
exactly the same thing
in my experience, yet we just
speak a different language.
And I asked them to connect.
And they ultimately
came to this conclusion
that they both
wanted to move home
to where they were
both born in BC
up in the mountains in Kelowna.
But their faces
were contracting,
and they were like, oh, jeez.
You know, it was hard.
And you know, making it complex
and making it challenging.
And I just said, guys,
what are you-- stop.
And they looked at me,
and they said, what?
I said, if we had a guy standing
outside the door looking in
through the window
and he couldn't
hear what you were saying
about re-imagining your future
and moving to a place
that nurtures you,
and he just had to look
at your body language
and he had to assess what
you were talking about,
he'd probably come and go,
is she dying of cancer,
or have they both got
six months to live?
Which is it?
We make this shit so
complex, and it is so simple.
And one of the things I love
to invite and challenge people
to do is act upon what we know
as opposed to what we do not.
So if I'm living in Boulder,
Colorado, and I don't like it,
the biggest obstacle
I'll put my way
is, but I don't know
where I do like, James.
I don't know where is next.
My answer is if it's
not Boulder, anywhere.
But what if I move to
Seattle and I don't like it?
You move again.
We put so much emphasis
on the next move
that it stifles us
from doing anything.
People come to me for clarity
about where they should move
and businesses
they should set up.
I go, let's look at reality.
Let's look at your
current reality.
What is working?
And let's start there.
That's the simple
place to start.
>> One of the common threads
that you've had throughout this
conversation we've had-- and
it's been very enlightening,
thank you-- is this idea that
we are more disconnected now
despite being in a world
that's more connected than ever
before.
And ultimately, I think,
if I'm correct here,
that's the core
wound you're trying
to heal in trying to prove
that we are connected,
we are related.
And we've been taught in these
ideals of the evolution theory
that it's all about competition.
And then science is
now proving that, no.
The big trees don't crowd the
light from the little trees.
They give nutrients via the
mycelium and via the mushrooms
they grow and the fungi
underneath the soil
to support those trees.
And in certain other
times, the small trees
support the big trees.
There is an enormous
web of cooperation
that happens in the world.
And my question to
you is, how do you
think we start to heal these
big problems, the disconnect,
the emotional trauma,
the locking it all down,
the repeating it again,
generation after generation?
How do we start to solve some
of these huge problems that
could really, if we
did solve them, help
to unlock possibilities
that could potentially
solve the biggest problems
that we face on planet Earth,
I think?
>> I mean, obviously I'm biased,
and obviously I'm connected
to what we're doing
through One Last Talk.
I'm not saying it's the
answer, but it's certainly
our way of doing this.
Another avenue for this
is through the lens
of organizations
and corporations.
And in many cases, you've got
so many millions of people
who get up in the morning, go
to a community or an office
or a job or a business,
and then they come home,
they watch Netflix, they go
to sleep, or they watch FMTV.
And they go to sleep, and they
wake up the following morning.
It's rinse and repeat.
And for many of those,
their community,
their village is
the place they work.
And we hear all the
time around culture.
You know, this culture and
that culture and whatever.
And it's getting so noisy.
To me, culture is built on
nothing other than trust.
And I think if you can create
an environment where people
can understand why they don't
trust themselves and begin
to reconcile that, then they
start to trust their intuition.
Then they start to
trust their bodies.
trust each other.
To me, it's all built on
this sense of trust inside.
And again, someone
said, you know,
companies are never going to
allow One Last Talk to happen
in their organization.
It's just not going to happen.
They're not going to create
that sense of vulnerability.
And there's a theory called
the self-determination theory.
I don't know if
you've read about it.
And it cites after
massive research
that human beings deeply
desire three things.
They want to feel
competent at what they do,
they want to feel authentic
in their own lives,
and they want to feel connected.
And we're now going into
multiple organizations,
and we're creating an
environment where people
stand up and share a very
vulnerable part of themselves
to a community of people
that they work with.
And what's happening,
which I knew
intuitively was going to happen,
but now we have the proof,
is that connection
goes through the roof.
Attrition goes down.
Loyalty starts to happen.
This sense of, I have your back.
And this sense of
belonging and connection
is emerging within
cultures and companies.
So I don't know how we
do it on a global scale,
but I do know this,
is that we've all
got to take some degree
of responsibility for it.
I think I have a moral
obligation as a father
to work on my own
shit, even the stuff I
don't know that's there.
And I trust that by
doing that, my kids are
going to be in a better place.
But the one thing I'd
add to that is something
that I feel has worked extremely
well for us is recognize,
no matter what I do, I'm
going to mess my kids up.
No matter how good a parent--
if I hug them too much,
I'm going to mess them up.
If I never hug them at all,
And what I mean by
that is I'm never
going to give up on
my kids, but maybe I
can let them go a
little bit and not
need to be the perfect father.
And that has given me a
degree of peace to give myself
a break when I lose my temper
or I have a short or I'm this
or I let myself
down, is that I don't
turn into this spiral
which takes me a week
to get back out of.
I forgive myself, I
name it, I apologize.
Let's move on.
>> And kids always seem to
forget and then forgive.
They do.
I've noticed that.
In my worst moments,
I feel bad, and I
feel like I've caused
irreparable damage.
And in the morning, there is
a hug and a kiss and a look.
Hey, I love you.
How you doing?
And it's like, wow.
You forgive me?
Oh my goodness.
What another opportunity, right?
>> I asked a man recently
to share his One Last Talk
on stage.
And he shared for the first
time ever-- he wasn't even sure
why he was sharing it.
And one of the biggest
challenges with One Last Talk
or anything else is
that I think deep down,
we all want to make an impact.
But the challenge is we all
want to look good doing it.
And he said, if I share this
talk, I might be judged.
If I share this
talk-- and I said,
yeah, your talk is about
you, but it's not for you.
It's your story, but
it's a gift to the world.
And you have to trust
that if you do this
and you trust this
process and you trust me,
this is going to be OK.
This is going to
be more than OK.
And he shared the day that
he put the barrel of the gun
into his mouth and had
his finger on the trigger,
and he was about
to take his life.
And he remembered that when he
looked or considered suicide
in the past that three of his
friends came to him and said,
if you want to kill
yourself, that's OK.
Well, it's not
OK, but that's OK,
because we can't prevent
you from doing it.
But we're going to ask
you to do one thing.
We're going to ask you to
take a list of our names
and our numbers, and we're
going to ask you to call us
to say goodbye before you go.
And he said, that
list is the very thing
that I go to every time I'm
about to commit suicide.
And he finishes this
extraordinary talk.
He gets an overwhelming
standing ovation.
I just-- not this--
[LIGHT CLAPPING]
--one person.
People burst onto their feet.
They give him a
standing ovation.
And then I turn it
to the audience.
And this woman puts her
hand up, and I said,
would you like-- she says,
why didn't you tell me?
It's his sister.
I said, with respect,
you're making this about you
right now.
The next person was
his grandmother.
And she said, I want
him to know that he
is loved beyond measure.
And the next woman who
wasn't related at all
took the microphone
and said, Chris,
can you be the first
name on my list?
When you share the parts
of yourself that scare you,
when you share the
parts of yourself
that you're ashamed of, when
you share the parts of yourself
that you deeply regret, when
you allow the world to see
all of you, it is the
only time the world
can accept all of you.
You don't have to do a
One Last Talk to do that,
but I would encourage people to
share the parts of themselves
that they've spent a lot
of time and energy hiding
from the world, and
watch how free you feel.
And watch what you can
do with that energy.
And then maybe, just maybe,
you can go out into the world
and inspire other
people to do the same.
And that's a world
I want to live in.
>> I love it, Philip.
Thank you so much for your time.
>> Thank you for having me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]